+++
title = "A Review That I Should Probably Have Saved For Another, Less Contentious Time But Nevertheless Did and Ultimately Enjoyed"
date = 2023-12-16
[extra]
book = "The War of Return"
author = "Adi Schwartz and Einat Wilf"
finished = 2023-12-03
rating = "★★★★☆"
+++

*The War of Return* is a book written by two self-described "prominent
Israeli leftists" that makes a bold claim in its subtitle: "Western
Indulgence of the Palestinian Dream Has Obstructed the Path to
Peace."[^1] The book was originally published, in Hebrew, in 2018. The
English translation debuted two years after in 2020. Three years later,
and three months after the October 7th attacks, those who hope for peace
seem to have more reason for despair than ever. I read *War of Return*
hoping for a fresh perspective. So together, let’s turn to co-authors
Adi Schwartz—an Israeli journalist formerly at Haaretz, the country’s
largest left-wing newspaper—and Einat Wilf—a former Labor party
politician—to discuss "the single largest obstacle to lasting peace" and
how we might go about solving this seemingly intractable conflict
capturing the attention of the world.[^2]

<!-- more -->

## The Narrative of the Conflict, as Recounted in *War of Return*
### You Probably Think You Know What the Arab-Israeli Conflict Is
The Arab-Israeli conflict, stretching now for over seven decades and
continuing to impact the lives of millions of people throughout the
Middle East, has had numerous near misses with peace. This is because of
a fundamentally incorrect assumption often held by Israeli and Western
negotiators that “this [is] a territorial conflict that [can] be solved
by partitioning the land into two states, that the Palestinians only
[want] a state of their own in the territories, and that the Israeli
occupation and the settlements [are] the primary obstacle preventing
peace.”[^3][^4] According to Schwartz and Wilf, they have misunderstood
the problem.

In reality, our favorite co-authors say, this is an ideological conflict
over the very existence of Israel. It is an absolute rejection of
minority sovereignty in a region dominated by the Arabs, and it is not
new: “…the belief that Zionism was an outrageous injustice predated the
war and caused the Arabs to violently oppose the Jewish national
liberation movement many decades earlier.”[^5] The territorial framing
of the conflict is thus not conducive to a solution—no state, with any
borders, will appease a movement that feels like partition itself is an
injustice.

> ...this was not a conflict between two national movements, each
> seeking first and foremost its own independence, but rather about one
> group (the Arabs) seeking first and foremost to foil the independence
> of another (the Jews).[^6]

### What Does That Have to Do with Refugees?
Palestinians' claimed right of return, in the minds of Schwartz and
Wilf, is a deceptively named aspiration to negate Jewish
self-determination. There can be no democratic Jewish sovereignty where
Jews are a minority.[^7] It is thus that the Palestinian right of return
is "not merely about moving ten or twenty miles to homes left behind,
but primarily about returning to the time before the terrible defeat of
the Nakba and the establishment of the state of Israel," by making Jews
a minority in their own homeland.[^8] In essence, it is about rewinding
history and undoing the creation of the Jewish state.

I myself misunderstood what was meant by "right of return" before
reading this book. As the phrase is used, the right of return is the
right of Palestinians to return not to a future Palestinian state in the
West Bank and Gaza—as I had believed, and supported—but in fact, to the
sovereign state of Israel. Return "could only be realized in the
territory of the state of Israel atop the ruins of the Jewish right of
self-determination.”[^9] To mandate a right of return to Israeli
territory is to reject "the principle of territorial partition" and a
two-state solution.[^10]

*War of Return* attributes the creation of the refugee issue to this
rejection of the two-state solution by the Arabs. They argue that if the
Arabs had accepted partition in 1948 and established a state of their
own, no one would have been displaced:[^11]

> ...it is a fact that the departure of the Arabs was a result of the
> war and only of the war. Before the Arabs waged war against partition,
> they did not leave their homes. The Arab flight and the refugees from
> the war were neither inevitable nor necessary nor inherent in
> Zionism.[^12]

The blame for the displacement of the refugees, they claim, is
unflinchingly on the shoulders of the Arabs, not the Jews. No one is
entitled to the status quo ante:

> Those who wage war to eliminate another people, and to prevent their
> achieving independence, cannot legitimately complain that “they
> suffered an exceptional injustice” when they lose and flee the
> land.[^13]

Furthermore, according to Schwartz and Wilf, the legal right of return
simply does not exist: "No legal obligation or treaty existed that...
obliged Israel to let [Palestinians] return to its territory" in the
aftermath of the 1948 war.[^14] Flight and expulsions occurred
throughout the 20th century, including during this seminal war. Indeed,
unlike in Israel where an Arab minority remained after the war, "not a
single Jew remained in the areas conquered by Arab forces."[^15] 

How can it be that the Palestinian refugee problem still exists 75 years
later, and at a greater scale than its start? "The answer to why the
Palestinian refugee problem still exists lies neither in the conditions
of its birth nor in its scale nor in the number of victims: nothing here
is unique. The answer must lie elsewhere."[^16] That elsewhere, *War of
Return* posits, is in the refusal of the Arabs "to solve the [conflict]
by creating a new status quo in the Middle East" in which Jews and Arabs
could have exercised self-determination side-by-side—which was
accomplished through the political manipulation and exacerbation of the
Palestinian refugee issue.[^17]

### The Tragic Ensuing Decades
Schwartz and Wilf argue that the critical issue is the Palestinians'
demand for return to Israel. Progress toward peace is made on all fronts
but return, the "one article that Israel [can] absolutely not agree to,
as it [entails] its very suicide."[^18] Return is instead silently
propped up by Arab support—all but guaranteeing a continued, violent
existence for Palestinians and all others in the region. Promising
initiatives to resettle hundreds of thousands of refugees in the
immediate aftermath of the 1948 war, in the Jordan Valley and the Sinai,
went nowhere. The "biggest rehabilitation project of the 1950s for
Palestinian refugees," a farm run by Musa Alami (a prominent Palestinian
nationalist), employed thousands of Palestinians in the Jericho
area—with a specific focus on orphans of the war—and grew orchards and
productive crops over thousands of dunams, with export contracts to
Saudi Arabia, fifty wells, and a school.[^19] It was leveled in 1955 by
Palestinians believing its existence would help "enable the resolution
of outstanding political disputes between the sides."[^20]

The refugee issue, claim Schwartz and Wilf, is cynically manufactured
and perpetuated by Arab leaders. The long-term adoption of the position
that "improving the living conditions of a few hundreds of thousands of
refugees [is] less important than their war with Zionism" has led the
Arab world to the creation of a Palestinian refugee-hood that is
completely divorced from the experience of every other refugee
group.[^21] Indeed, Palestinian refugees are not governed by UNHCR, the
UN agency for refugees, but by their own temporary commission—UNRWA—the
regular extension of which "has become a quasi-automatic annual
tradition" at the United Nations.[^22] *War of Return* devotes a great
amount of effort to describing how UNRWA "was transformed from being a
failed agency for refugee rehabilitation to a very successful
organization for" halting progress in the Middle East.[^23] "For
decades," Schwartz and Wilf say, "UNRWA has sustained a parallel world
of policy and executive decisions that serve the Palestinian narrative
alone," and leave the Middle East in a radicalizing limbo that actively
works against peace.[^24]

The list of UNRWA oddities is very, very long. Unlike all other groups,
UNRWA's "Palestine refugee" status is hereditary—resulting in a
registered population of over 5 million people from an initial group of
approximately 700,000 displaced Palestinians (see chart below). Unlike
all other groups, refugee status is not surrendered when additional
citizenship is achieved; indeed, 2.2 million UNRWA-registered refugees
are citizens of Jordan, but they retain their "refugee" status.
Astoundingly, these refugees make up 70% of Jordan's population: "It is
difficult, bordering on impossible, to get a consistent answer from
Jordanian officials to the question of how the Jordanian state sees its
own citizens."[^25] Another 2.2 million UNRWA-registered refugees live
in the West Bank and Gaza, territories allocated for the future
Palestinian state, making them refugees within their own future state.
An additional million are officially split between Syria and Lebanon,
territories where "most of them do not even reside... anymore."[^26]
Since the 1960s, "most of the [Palestinian] refugee camps were
neighborhoods of the Arab towns next to which they were built," with
housing markets and daily realities entirely different from the Western
image of vast, impoverished tent cities.[^27] Within these
refugee-camps-that-are-cities, Western-funded UNRWA-run schools teach
students "a narrative of victimhood, based on a singular, striking
injustice," which have resulted over time, Schwartz and Wilf believe, in
a direct connection between "the perpetuation of UNRWA for political
reasons to the emergence of" Palestinian terrorism.[^28] Thus, according
to Schwartz and Wilf, the purpose of the continued use and expansion of
refugee status in this situation is to perpetuate and reinforce the Arab
claim toward the right of return and its inherent goal of eliminating
Israel.[^29]

![A chart of Palestine refugees over time, increasing from 0 in 1948 to
over 5 million in 2019](refugees.png)

## So, Should You Read It?

*The War of Return* is worth reading, but is difficult to synthesize.
The book is disorganized: it has a message it wishes to impress upon
you, but is not sufficiently clear and driven in doing so. It is without
a doubt the most thoroughly cited book I have ever encountered. A full
third of its page count is dedicated to footnotes and bibliography
alone.[^30] In an issue swimming in contentious Instagram infographics,
Schwartz and Wilf have brought the receipts.[^31] In doing so, however,
they interweave theory, history, and proscribed solutions in a manner
that leaves the reader with a significantly improved understanding of
the conflict but great difficulty summing up this new knowledge. The
book desperately needs a more linear structure.

Additionally, assertions about Palestinian thought are found throughout
the book and can be difficult to prove true or false. How would one go
about assessing the claim that "the Palestinians' commitment to the idea
that they are still refugees and also possess a right of return to the
state of Israel is deeply embedded in the Palestinian identity and its
collective ethos?"[^32] Schwartz and Wilf proffer that it "is an issue
on which no Palestinian political opposition or dissent exists," which
is perhaps as good a proxy as you will find.[^33] I don't necessarily
doubt that it is correct that there is a cultural narrative of
"perpetual injustice" in the Palestinian camp, but I am cognizant of the
fact that it is difficult to prove definitively. The book's arguments
are made weaker by their occasional reliance on alleged Palestinian
beliefs, as opposed to evidence of action.

Furthermore, the book's critique of the West—which we are led to believe
by the subtitle will be severe—is, in essence, that it has failed to
sufficiently counter anti-Israel extremism in the Arab world. The book
makes a compelling argument that this is the case, and that
"geostrategic interests" (read: oil) have muddled what would otherwise
be clear opposition to an ideology that seeks to eliminate a UN member
state.[^34] Still, this strikes me as a somewhat confusing target for
criticism in this case when it may be more appropriate to condemn the
Arab extremists themselves.

With that said: this book managed to significantly change my thinking on
the conflict. As someone who thinks about this a fair amount, I would
consider that on its face to be a significant endorsement. If that's not
enough of an endorsement, here's another one: you should probably read
this book. I now realize that I did not at all understand the
Palestinian refugee issue before reading this book, and in its aftermath
feel confident and prepared in its discussion. Schwartz and Wilf did not
challenge my fundamental view of the conflict, but they gave me a much
clearer understanding of the refugee issue, which has profound
implications.

*The War of Return* has been a timely read ever since its publication.
Indeed, in the ensuing years, very few of the foundational facts and
conditions it addresses have experienced any shift; the Arab-Israeli
conflict had reached somewhat of a standstill.

It is the "fervent hope [of Schwartz and Wilf] that in writing this book
[they] contribute in a meaningful way to real and lasting peace." As
such, their proposals need adjustment.[^35] With the outbreak of the
Israel-Hamas War in the aftermath of October 7th, there is potential for
a serious shift in the history of the conflict.

After the war is over, there may be an opportunity—for the first time in
a long time—for meaningful change. The parties must move quickly to
final-status negotiations, to bring a conclusion to the violence that
has plagued our peoples for decades. We can no longer think about slow
change. Two states, for two peoples, as originally envisioned by the
United Nations in 1947 as "lawful, moral, and legitimate" solution.[^36]
In order for that to happen we must be guided, in part, by the book's
total refusal of the right of return:

> When Palestinians complain that recognizing a Jewish state means
> relinquishing the right of return, the response should be, "Yes, that
> is exactly what it means."[^37]

If indeed we stand, surrounded by violence, on the precipice of
peace—the storm before the calm, if you will—then this book stands to be
more relevant than ever.

---

[^1]: In the interest of full transparency, I will admit here that the
subtitle begins with the word “How,” which I have not included in the
quotation for the purpose of sentence flow.

[^2]: Literal, ["The War of Return"](https://literal.club/book/the-war-of-return-24grq).

[^3]: Schwartz and Wilf, *The War of Return*, 55

[^4]: As you read this review, you may find yourself confused, thinking:
"These citations seem to imply that *War of Return* has thousands of
pages. That seems unlikely." You would be correct. I read *War of
Return* on a Kindle, and thus have had great difficulty finding stable
page numbers. Instead, I have provided a "location." You may ask
yourself: "How do I use a location?" To which I respond, "This is a
question for Amazon." For now, I will simply apologize in advance.

[^5]: Schwartz and Wilf, *The War of Return*, 131.

[^6]: Id. at 148.

[^7]: This is just definitional—you'd get outvoted. You can also look at
historical examples: there was no self-determination by Jews in Arab
countries, or the United States, or anywhere else that Jews lived. One
needs a majority.

[^8]: Schwartz and Wilf, *The War of Return*, 761.

[^9]: Id. at 2448.

[^10]: Id. at 2961.

[^11]: It is left unaddressed how fledgling Israel would have handled a
much larger Arab minority. In the modern day, Israeli Arabs make up
around 20% of the population.

[^12]: Schwartz and Wilf, *The War of Return*, 387.

[^13]: Id. at 436.

[^14]: Id. at 907.

[^15]: Id. at 416.

[^16]: Id. at 496.

[^17]: Id. at 1398.

[^18]: Id. at 2961.

[^19]: Id. at 1631.

[^20]: Id. at 1329.

[^21]: Id. at 1474.

[^22]: Id. at 1953.

[^23]: Id. at 2248.

[^24]: Id. at 3559.

[^25]: Id. at 3785.

[^26]: Id. at 3516.

[^27]: Id. at 2065.

[^28]: Id. at 2496.

[^29]: I would like to note, at this point, that there is a lot more to
say about UNRWA. In fact, there are probably several books worth of
things to be said about UNRWA. If you want to read one such book, you
should definitely read *War of Return*! There are comparisons of budget
details and staffing numbers between UNRWA and UNHCR, analysis of the
success of other major UN revitalization agencies like UNKRA and why
that didn't happen with UNRWA, and more. But, for the purpose of this
review, we have to move on. Apologies.

[^30]: I love footnotes. I especially like when they are humorous,
instead of just page citations, which I realize this review—much like
*War of Return* itself—lacks. So here is one in compensation.

[^31]: Including but not limited to archives from the UN, Israel, US,
UK, and Al Jareeza's Palestine Papers, interviews with high-ranking
Israeli politicians and military figures, and a wealth of books,
articles, reports, and position papers from throughout the conflict's
long history.

[^32]: Schwartz and Wilf, *The War of Return*, 3246

[^33]: Ibid.

[^34]: Id. at 1309.

[^35]: One such adjustment, if Schwartz and Wilf are taking suggestions,
would be to address the rise of the new Israeli right. Netanyahu's
current government contains a minister with a conviction for terrorism;
their book was published before this latest example of extremism from
the Jewish side, and I would hope an updated version would address this.

[^36]: Schwartz and Wilf, *The War of Return*, 1006.

[^37]: Id. at 3408.
