+++
title = "What I've Learned from Stella Levi (So Far)"
date = 2024-12-16T18:28:00-08:00
[extra]
book = "One Hundred Saturdays"
author = "Michael Frank"
finished = 2024-12-15
rating = "★★★★★"
+++

This is the most vibrant, imagery-inducing work that I may have ever
come upon. The first half of the book is dedicated to breathing life
into the long-since vanished world of Rhodes' Juderia. I have always
been prone to feelings of nostalgia for times that I never
experienced.[^1] This book exploits that tendency to the greatest
degree, accentuated by stylized and interesting art interleaved within
the text. Since I first cracked open its cover, I have been thinking
ceaselessly about the structural features of the Juderia that induced
specific behaviors and tendencies, which of those I admire and which of
those I think are counter-productive, and how one would go about
recreating an idealized version of this sort of enclave. Certainly an
unexpectedly great book for people interested in the ways that urban
environments impact their residents. Or people who like cities that
sound like Acre or Jaffa.

Of course, it is also serious work about an issue of much import: that
of the total, intentional destruction of life in the Juderia and all
that that implicates. I used the word "vanished" above to describe what
happened to the world we witness in the first half of the book, but this
is wrong: it was annihilated. This makes the middle of *One Hundred
Saturdays* a rather heavier read than its beginning. It is also what
makes the book worthwhile—life is not a walk in the park, and there is
beauty in its challenges. This work would be incomplete as an analysis
of life in the Juderia without a discussion of its end. The two are
inseparable.

*One Hundred Saturdays* is not even actually about historical events, so
much as it is about Stella Levi herself. It is through her life—which so
remarkably intersects time and again with the greatest focal points of
change—that we learn about the shifting world. Stella is a woman of
unfathomable resilience. This book is a treatise to her, a shocking and
kind gesture from a close friend. The greatest gift one could divine
from these pages would be a fraction of her insight.

The book was also valuable to me in that it forced me to confront my own
biases. I am in many ways very anti-diaspora.[^2] *One Hundred
Saturdays* managed to challenge my anti-diasporic stance. Were I to
apply to it the same standards as I do elsewhere, I should have been far
more dismissive of life in the Juderia, Judeo-Spanish, and the culture
expressed in the book. Instead, I found myself enamored. This is
probably attributable to a combination of my unfamiliarity with
Sephardic history between the Inquisition and 1948, personal connections
and feelings of shame toward the Ashkenazi diasporic experience, and the
charisma that emanated from every page of this book. I think the
adjustment that I should take away is not a total reversal of my
stance—the fate of the Rhodeslis must ensure that—but a softening.

I would finally like to extend a huge thank you to my wonderful mom, who
recommended me this book.

---

[^1]: Or, for that matter, never existed, as is the case with my
feelings toward a whole host of Disney movies.

[^2]: This of course clashes with the fact that I live in America, but:
I recognize that what is correct for the individual on a case-by-case
basis may differ from the needs of the whole/many, am not above the
hypocrisy of adjudicating myself as a special case, and also think that
the American acceptance of Jews does make it something of a special
case. It is worse than Israel, but it is better than everywhere else
where we are totally unwanted.
