+++
title = "Waking the Public to Waking Lions"
date = 2024-12-14T13:53:42-08:00
updated = 2024-12-14T15:48:19-08:00
[extra]
book = "Waking Lions"
author = "Ayelet Gundar-Goshen"
finished = 2024-11-28
rating = "★★★★☆"
+++

**Author's Note:** This review is an adaptation of the final paper I
wrote for Russell Berman's wonderful [Zionism and the Novel]. For
another artifact of my work in the class, check out my review of [The
Illusion of Return].

## Abstract
This paper seeks to investigate Ayelet Gundar-Goshen’s novel Waking
Lions as a work of engaged literature. A thorough analysis of her
writing is conducted to extract the specific political positions she
advocates. The analysis of the political commentary contained in her
fiction is then paired and contrasted with contemporary anthropological
scholarship on the issue of Eritrean migrants in Israel to build a
deeper understanding of the context in which the book was created and
where it now stands, approaching a decade after publication. The paper
ultimately claims that Gundar-Goshen’s writing opens a wide view into
the everyday strife and overlapping conflicts and harms of Israel’s
myriad communities and urges a remediation of the Eritrean migrant
crisis in Israel through integration and acceptance. The novel’s framing
places the issues at the core of the text beyond the scope of the
question of Zionism: rather, the continued implementation of Zionism is
what has given rise to the status quo, thus necessitating Gundar-Goshen
look beyond the philosophy—toward human values and compassion—to find
the source of the mandate to aid the Eritreans.

This dissection of Waking Lions is important precisely because the book
has been treated as an unimportant work by the scholarly community. The
text doesn’t touch the question of the Palestinians, and thus is
sidelined. But just as is seen with the communities in the book, nothing
is black and white: Israel is more than its conflict with the
Palestinians. Waking Lions’ unflinching spotlighting of the myriad
internal issues faced by the diverse Israeli polity make it one of the
most important texts to come out of the country in recent years.

## The Text as an Engaged Work
Waking Lions is not only engaged literature insofar as all texts are
engaged literature, dealing with subjects that are covered by the broad
tent of political opinion, but instead goes above and beyond in
provoking a political conversation around, and interrogating the
political ramifications and engagements of, the Eritrean refugee issue
in Israel. This is by design. Gundar-Goshen’s intention in creating this
work of fiction was to make her political lamentations appear more
compelling to a broader audience by disguising them in the contours of
characters with depth and dimension and emotion that readers can
recognize from their own lives. A political diatribe with specific
policy criticisms and recommendations will only be consumed by a very
specific subset of people. A work that engages more directly with the
universal instinct of storytelling can better evangelize its message.
This is how Waking Lions was crafted from its inception.

An important component of Waking Lions’ political engagement is the
length to which Gundar-Goshen goes to impress upon the reader the
physical realities of Eritrean migrants in Israel, seeking to highlight
their suffering through its personification in the character of Sirkit.
Sirkit, the Eritrean woman at the center of the novel, is a complex
figure—at once despised for her manipulations of Dr. Eitan Green and yet
seemingly using her Machiavellian abuses for the betterment of the lives
of overlooked refugees. It is only after forming a relationship with
Sirkit that the reader is introduced to the details of her living
conditions: a caravan, one cramped room filled with 8 mattresses and
dirty dishes, parked behind the gas station where its residents
work.[^1] Sirkit herself scrubs floors during the day. None of the
Eritreans who cram themselves together into the caravan to sleep on the
floor night after night are paid the minimum wage nor given the
traditional benefits of employment. Additional emotionally difficult
information is held even further, with the reasons for Sirkit’s flight
from Eritrea hinted at only in the very last chapter of the novel. Here,
in her internal monologue, she refers to the African nation as “the land
of the dead children.”[^2] She reflects on a “well near the village that
one day, simply had no more water,” on soldiers that stole their flour,
on the trek over land to Egypt, on abusive Bedouin smugglers, and on
Israel, the place where “she stopped. From [which] she would not
move.”[^3] The strategic delay in the delivery of this information is
done to counter the jaded desensitization of the receiving audience.
There is the age-old adage: “one death is a tragedy, a million is a
statistic.” By giving the physical conditions of the Eritreans a
familiar face in the form of Sirkit, the theoretical plight of a people
is turned into the tangible plight of a person.

Beyond the individual suffering, the systemization of the Eritrean
struggle in the Jewish State is given an embodied form in the text
through Eitan’s visit to the Holot Detention Center. Having come to
visit Sirkit, Eitan looks out across the vast desert yard and observes:
“Any one of those people could be Sirkit.”[^4] This is an explicit
declaration of the above determination that Sirkit is a stand-in for the
plight of Eritreans in Israel more broadly—Gundar-Goshen states that
Sirkit is equivalent to the other Eritreans in Holot, and thus that all
the detainees are as human as the book has portrayed her to be. It is
also a further description of the dehumanization that Eritreans are
subjected to at the hands of the Israeli government. Eitan continues:
“They looked as alike as a herd of sheep. Of cows…. When he looked at
them together, a crowded collection of bodies, he felt that they had
lost every drop of selfhood, and all the small differences that made
each of them who they were had been eclipsed by that large mass of
identical flesh… the overcrowded space stripped them of their
personalities and made them a single entity—Eritrean women…. They were
Eritrean women waiting to be deported…”[^5] In his brief visit to the
Holot Detention Center, Eitan is used as a tool to convey the banal
brutality of the destruction of Eritrean individuality in the national
system.

The ultimate resolution of the book’s moral challenge through Sirkit and
Eitan’s deception reveals Gundar-Goshen’s preference for how to resolve
the political quandary of Eritrean migrants in Israel. The roiling truth
of the story behind the illegal hospital in the desert—Eitan’s initial
crime of vehicular manslaughter, Sirkit’s blackmail, the robbery of
hospital materials, peripheral involvement with the Bedouin criminal
underworld, hints of adultery, and everything else that ultimately
comprises the narrative of Waking Lions—is smoothed over. Sirkit does
this of her own initiative. Speaking with Eitan’s wife, Liat, she papers
over the reality of the situation that had brought his family and
marriage so close to collapse: “Before the Bedouins had surprised them,
Eitan had gone to treat her injuries. He’d left Yaheli’s bed and driven
two and a quarter hours to get there. Only an angel would do something
like that.”[^6] With the full context Gundar-Goshen provided during the
action, the additional layers are revealed. Eitan drove down to perform
the surgery in part because of his romantic feelings toward Sirkit as
well as her continued power over him due to the potential for her
testimony. But in the end this is resolved—his service to the Eritreans
is simplified: “He felt guilty about the silence she had imposed on him
concerning Zakai’s bribes. He wanted to atone…. It was illegal. And
dangerous…. And [Liat] realized suddenly why he had been so interested
in the investigation of that Eritrean’s death. Those people weren’t just
a newspaper article for him. He knew them. He was helping them.”[^7]
Gundar-Goshen does briefly broaden the scope to include some of the
other narratives in Israeli discourse, describing a café scene after
Eitan and Sirkit’s revisionist story hits the news: “Several people
began arguing. We can’t have all of Africa coming here. If those
bleeding hearts have their way, we’ll end up without a country.”[^8] But
this broadening is done primarily for the purpose of foregrounding the
opposite narrative—her narrative— as expressed by a woman who approaches
Eitan to say, “We need more people like you in this country.”[^9]
Through Liat’s acceptance of the morality of her husband’s actions and
the Israeli public’s endorsement, Gundar-Goshen lends her own voice to
the idea that Eritreans in Israel should be accepted, appeased, and
integrated. Her political preferences, expressed through these varied
characters, are paired with an additional pithy quip, a sort of
condemnation of the idea that the hard work her politics would mandate
can be ignored. It is the final line in the novel, and it comes from the
mind of Eitan Green, newly freed to return to his old life
and—apparently—bury his head in the sand: “How beautiful the earth is
when it moves properly. How pleasant to move with it. To forget that any
other movement ever existed. That a different movement is even
possible.”[^10]

## Clashing Against Reality
Gundar-Goshen’s political commentary through Waking Lions of course
exists in the context of Israeli reality. This has continued to evolve
quite rapidly in the seven years since the publication of her work of
engaged literature. As recently as last year, there was violence in the
streets of Tel Aviv between different Eritrean factions resulting in the
injury of over 100 individuals as well as significant arrests. The
conditions in Eritrea that led so many to choose “liminality in Israel
over forced conscription (often until death) in Eritrea or ethnic
cleansing by Arab groups in Darfur” are the same or worse as they were
at the time Gundar-Goshen released her novel to the world.[^11] Migrants
largely remain in limbo, governed under the conflicting mandates of the
Prevention of Infiltration Law and the 1951 Refugee Convention.

Aspects of Gundar-Goshen’s humanitarian ideology have received broader
adoption. The Holot Detention Center, a location that played a
significant role in the psyche of the Eritreans of Waking Lions, was
shuttered in 2018.[^12] The Deposit Law, which mandated 20% of asylum
seekers’ salary be deposited in a bank account only accessible at the
airport when leaving the country, was struck down by the Israeli Supreme
Court in 2020.[^13] Eritreans have developed their own community
centers, educational structures, and institutions that “attest to the
agency of the… community in Israel.”[^14] Migrants are building lives in
the country, living on visas that need renewal every 2-3 months.[^15]
This itself is a massive political victory for Gundar-Goshen’s school of
thought: as Waking Lions conveys, the daily lives “of Eritreans in
Israel are not apolitical.”[^16] Their continued existence in Israel is
a testament to the political success of the ideology expressed in
Gundar-Goshen’s work of engaged literature.

In spite of these developments, Israeli society remains broadly hostile
to the presence of the Eritrean migrants in precisely the ways that
Gundar-Goshen opposed in Waking Lions. The country is governed by an
extreme right-wing coalition which harbors significant anti-Eritrean
sentiment, though internal and external factors have made continued
attempts to address the migrant crisis low on its list of priorities.
The anti-migrant position resulted in the Prime Minister reneging on a
negotiated settlement with the UN refugee agency to give permanent
status to around half of asylum seekers in Israel in exchange for
resettling the other half in other countries.[^17] Such a compromise was
perceived as too soft and harshly criticized. Integration of Eritrean
migrants as full members of the Israeli polity, as citizens, is
perceived as undesirable. Emigration is encouraged, and the mass
departure of Eritrean migrants remains the state’s preferred outcome.

The specific interplay of the international system in the Eritrean
refugee crisis in Israel is a particularly rich topic for dissection. In
many ways, the sovereign Israeli system is set up in direct opposition
to the presence of Eritrean migrants, but is countered by international
refugee law that exists “precisely because states are often inclined to
act differently than how the law prescribes.”[^18] The particularly
proactive role that international governance plays in the day-to-day
experience of Eritrean migrants in Israel is made greater by the
already-enhanced focus of the international community on the Jewish
nation—a fact which the community has at times used to its advantage.
Eritrean society is not traditionally organized around the concept of
race or color, but rather ethnolinguistic groups and tribal
affiliation.[^19] In most migratory scenarios, individuals who may be
racialized as Black “attempt to highlight their immigrant background or
national origin to escape negative stereotypes” associated with this new
identity.[^20] The Eritrean community in Israel has become an exception
to this trend, opting to make the strategic decision to self-identify as
“Black.” This particular language is intended to garner support from
abroad by contextualizing the experience of Eritrean migrants in Israel
in a foreign framework, so as to make it more intelligible in the
international arena and increase pressure on the Israeli state to halt
deportations. The role of nonnative forces in the Eritrean-Israeli
crisis goes largely undiscussed in Waking Lions, to its detriment.

## Conclusions
Ayelet Gundar-Goshen’s Waking Lions paints a colorful picture of a
pressing, contemporary Israeli issue, presenting the reader with a clear
call to action through its expert personification of the problem. The
narrative is thoroughly grounded in modern Israel, making the
intentional decision to place the question of Zionism squarely in the
past. The Jewish State already exists—Gundar-Goshen’s narrative
interprets the Eritrean migrant crisis within its borders as a question
to be answered by the generic State portion of the Zionist dream, not
the Jewish (and by extension Zionist) part. The novel implores its
audience to take action to embrace and integrate Eritreans into the
fabric of Israeli society. Its detailed description of the suffering of
the migrant community, in desperate poverty and constant fear of state
action, is gracefully described with its day-to-day complexities—its
members are not pure good, nor evil—while ensuring that it is clear that
such suffering is a moral failing of the state. Gundar-Goshen believes
this can be solved.

It is in turn a failing of the scholarly community that this is the
first paper to seriously engage with Waking Lions. The discussion of
international conflicts, and their portrayal in literature, is flashier.
Such analysis allows the author of a paper to connect with the oldest of
human traditions: myths of wars and conquests waged throughout the eons.
It is, bluntly, dramatic and fun. In the Israeli context in particular,
there is no shortage of conflicts and fictions about them to dissect;
the Palestinian issue in particular provides a sure and stable base for
study. It is, however, a poor academic that allows themselves to fall
prey to sampling bias. Israel is far more than its conflict with the
Palestinians. Indeed, for the Eritreans under constant threat of
deportation—and, for that matter, Dr. Eitan Green—the matters
highlighted in Waking Lions take precedence. The dialogue in this work
of engaged literature must be given space, instead of letting the
Palestinian issue take all the oxygen. With an opportunity to thrive, to
engage with and impact a large audience, Gundar-Goshen’s novel could
catalyze real progress on one of Israel’s most serious internal
conflicts.

---

[^1]: Ayelet Gundar-Goshen, *Waking Lions* (London: Pushkin Press,
      2017), pt. 2 chap. 3.
[^2]: Ibid., pt. 2 chap. 16.
[^3]: Ibid.
[^4]: Ibid.
[^5]: Ibid.
[^6]: Ibid., pt. 2 chap. 15.
[^7]: Ibid.
[^8]: Ibid., pt. 2 chap. 16.
[^9]: Ibid.
[^10]: Ibid.
[^11]: David Clinton Wills, "A Home at the End of the World: Eritrean
       and Sudanese Asylum Seekers in Tel Aviv, Israel," *Sanglap:
       Journal of Literary and Cultural Inquiry* 3, no. 2 (2017):
       321-349,
       [https://sanglap-journal.in/index.php/sanglap/article/view/223][sanglap].
[^12]: Ibid.
[^13]: Itamar Dubinsky, "Digital Diaspora: Eritrean Asylum Seekers'
       Cyberactivism in Israel," *African Diaspora* 12, no. 1-2 (2020):
       89-116: 10.1163/18725465-bja10002
[^14]: Ibid.
[^15]: Clinton Wills, "A Home at the End of the World"
[^16]: Dubinsky, "Digital Diaspora"
[^17]: James Yap, Hilina Fessahaie, and Enbal Singer, "Populism's Global
       Impact on Immigrants and Refugees: The Perspective of Eritrean
       Refugees in Europe and Israel," *Maryland Journal of
       International Law* 35 (2020): 189-201
[^18]: Dubinsky, "Digital Diaspora"
[^19]: Amanuel Isak Tewolde, "Becoming Black: Racial Formation of
       Eritrean Migrants in Israel," *African Diaspora* 13, no. 1-2
       (2021): 183-203, 10.1163/18725465-bja10006
[^20]: Ibid.

[Zionism and the Novel]: https://explorecourses.stanford.edu/search?q=COMPLIT37Q
[The Illusion of Return]: @/reading/illusion-of-return.md
[sanglap]: https://sanglap-journal.in/index.php/sanglap/article/view/223
