+++
title = "Stanford Quarterly Reflection (Y1Q3)"
date = 2024-07-18
updated = 2024-07-22
+++

This quarter was a radical departure from the previous two. It was
profoundly different and, at times, extremely difficult. Having now come
up for air on the other side, and looking at the great joys that I did
experience, I feel pretty positively about the whole affair. And the
change never stops, as I leave behind the great change of this year for
a whole new world: summer.

<!-- more -->

### Academics

I was in the lowest amount of units possible, a measly 12. These were:

1. COLLEGE 110: The Spirit of Democracy
2. CS 107: Computer Organization and Systems
3. CS 12SI: Spatial Computing Workshop
4. SUSTAIN 132: Sustainable Societies Lab: Exploring Israel's Innovation
   Ecosystem in Human & Planetary Health

This significantly reduced courseload was a mistake. I felt unmoored
with so little work, attending to my classes by catching assignments
just before they fell off my metaphorical plate. I don't believe this
was the most effective means of learning or academic growth. I ended up
in this situation because I was afraid to adapt my schedule to change,
and I could have avoided it by embracing risk and authoritative
decision-making. "Strong opinions, loosely held" feels like a phrase
that could be adapted here. I had structured my schedule around a
specific class (DESIGN 11) but ended up dropping the class in
exasperation after two weeks. I should have found a supplement (likely
DESIGN 1 or ARABLANG 21A), and reorganized my schedule to accommodate
it. The past being immutable, I will simply acknowledge that I believe
this would have been a better choice for me academically and, in certain
respects, emotionally as well.

Nevertheless, certain aspects of my academic experience during these ten
weeks deserve recognition. CS 107 introduced me to genuinely new aspects
of computer science—it forced me to engage with topics that I have
intentionally avoided in my own work, grapple with them, and come out
fully understanding them. These subjects include working in
memory-unsafe languages such as C, reading and interpreting x86_64
assembly, certain UNIX system details, and other topics in this orbit. I
received a relatively poor grade in this class! This was largely due to
my handling of the homework, and one assignment in particular which was
significantly late. It was still one of the most fulfilling learning
experiences of my engineering career.

The highlight of COLLEGE 110 was the opportunity it afforded me to
experience Larry Diamond in his element. We exist at a time of great
consequence, and his framing of the world, with its challenges and
opportunities, was enlightening. I feel very fortunate to have been able
to get to know the man. The events I attended with him that paralleled
the class were also remarkable. I met [Salam Fayyad], and gained a new
two-truths-and-a-lie fact from our personal interactions. I also enjoyed
[the Boiling Moat] panel on Taiwanese security, which I attended with my
friend [Jacob] while he was visiting. One panelist absolutely terrified
me, and I would like to work for him. The ebook is living on my Kindle,
and waits high up on my reading list.

CS 12SI and SUSTAIN 132 both represent the unparalleled latitude that
Stanford presents its community. A class exclusively diving into the
just-released Vision Pro, with real expert access and attention to each
student project, is an unbelievable offering. Like CS 40, CS 12SI was
new a little bumpy, but I can see it growing into something extremely
impressive and startup-accelerator-y, especially under [Gabriel's]
excellent guidance. SUSTAIN 132 lives in such a cool niche of academic
study I am grateful that it exists at all—and it helped that the
teaching staff was cool on top of it all.

### Personal

Social engagement was without a doubt where my focus lay this past
quarter. My sleep schedule lurched around the clock, [Oura] be damned.
And pouring all of my energy into a complex web of human relationships
occasionally reminded me of the [gossip trap] theory of prehistory,
which was less than pleasant.

I should spare a moment to appreciate and bid a very depressing goodbye
to the seniors who made this year special for me, and will not be there
when I return. Losing you all really took me by surprise, and I will not
be the same without you. Emily, you've been there for me like no one
else and I cannot acknowledge that enough. I'm rooting for (and counting
on, honestly) your return. Ben, you changed the trajectory of my career.
I was honored to receive some of *your* reflections in my inbox, and do
hope to see that continue, if only for my own enrichment. Joven, we met
for the first time in earnest over spring break, but by the time we were
the last two people in London, enjoying blueberry muffins and sipping on
lattes on our way to the airport, we had hit our stride. No one else
will debate the finer points of [café society] with me, and that is a
deficiency on their part. And of course, Sophia—I was perpetually amazed
at our relationship. You're the best, and I have faith that there is
little that can stop you from continuing to be just that.

In a somewhat surprising turn of events, this quarter I joined the
fraternity Phi Kappa Psi. This unique aspect of American university life
played no role in my parents' experience, and thus I was raised without
a great desire to participate in it when I went off to Stanford.
Nevertheless, as I met more and more Phi Psis, I was startled to realize
that I really enjoyed hanging out with them. I no longer find this
nearly as startling, having been to the ends of the Earth and back with
them (or at least, military bases, casinos, and watery watchtowers). To
the brothers that convinced me to join—Odin, Reisner, Lichu, Deveen,
Deitrich, Gareth, Farman, Santi, Milo—I owe you a great thanks, and
perhaps an apology as well for being so stubborn. I've wanted to be a
rapper for as long as I can remember, and you brought that out of me.
I'm extremely grateful. And to the fresh set of brothers—Bradley, Panos,
Arjin, Tiao—that I am a part of, you make me excited for the future.

I have not forgotten about the London gang, nor my promise to write
about the trip in this reflection. For those readers planning an outing
to the kingdom on which the sun never sets, I have only three important
notes—the white saffron hot chocolate at [Dark Sugars] will change your
life, the chai at [Dishoom] is bottomless, and if you're ever having too
much fun at an interactive performance of [Guys and Dolls] the dude to
your left will berate you. My deep thanks to the Danielpours for playing
host to us all, and welcoming us into your home for a lovely shabbat.
Everyone on this trip changed my life this year, and I love you all so
very much. In London and at Stanford, to have such friends is life's
greatest joy. Many of you have made your way into this post already, but
I will descend into lists again for those that have not. Stella, you
built a home on campus in the Warehaus that did not have to exist, but
was for me a heaven of frosted flakes and late night antics. Zach, I'm
coming for your PRs and your creatine water bottle. You undoubtedly fill
out the commemorative London shirt the best of all of us. Daniel, you
inspire me consistently by moving to action when I'm standing still,
afraid. Name a more [iconic duo] than us. And Kelly—you are so
wonderful.

But these are not the only people at Stanford who are important to me.
Vivek, I cannot wait to live with you next year. Nate, you are simply
way better at tennis than I am. Trun, we are living the lives we have
always wanted. Jack, if there is anyone in my life who possesses the
magnetic people powers of Gatsby (which I say as someone who, at
present, admires the man with no qualms) it is you. Sam—to meet your
family was a great honor and I'm sorry they saw me give you a piggyback
ride right before. Vedant and Riya: just because we're no longer all in
the great dorm of Crothers doesn't mean tea at 3 in the morning has to
stop, and indeed I hope it doesn't. Ryan, you've once again ended up a
key player in a crazy highlight-of-the-quarter evening and I can only
hope that this continues. Longhair, it didn't work out this quarter, but
come fall you bet we will hit the Pyramid of Giza. And Naama: you are
the only person with whom I have a weekly scheduled meal.

I miss you all.

It occurs to me that turning the personal section of a reflection into
basically a list of thank-yous is perhaps not particularly reflective.
It's somewhat hard to keep a journal in public. Perhaps this is just the
nature of things. Perhaps I have just once again waited too long to
finish writing and publish this post. Perhaps I shouldn't be married to
the format I've used in previous posts. We shall see.

### A Year Complete

I remain the person that I was when I began Stanford, but I happily
believe that have become an improved and refined version of that person.

I have aquired two new greenfield skills, in Arabic and assembly
language. I had no knowledge of the two before this year, and now I do.
These allow me to tangibly do things I could not do before.

The majority of my development, however, has been less tangible—but all
the more profound. Being at Stanford has placed me at the center of the
most incredible environment I could imagine; remarkable people surround
me at all hours of the day, and their effusive brilliance cannot help
but be impactful.

As the summer continues, and the community that comprises this small
Eden is dispersed, I have a hard time imagining that this year happened
at all. My time at Stanford was a short, recent burst. I'm now back in
San Francisco, and though I've maintained as large a sprinkling of
Stanford in my life as I can, it feels almost as if I have just awoken
from the most vivid, marvelous dream.

This summer will be exciting and hopefully rejuvenating as well. It will
also comprise its own Q4 reflection! But I'm not embarrassed to say that
I'm looking forward to returning to the Farm in the fall. I enjoyed
dreaming, and I have a feeling that it's not over yet.

[Salam Fayyad]: https://events.stanford.edu/event/a-conversation-with-salam-fayyad-former-prime-minister-of-the-palestinian-authority
[the Boiling Moat]: https://www.hoover.org/events/boiling-moat
[Jacob]: https://jacobneplokh.com
[Gabriel's]: https://gabriel-lipkowitz.com
[gossip trap]: https://www.theintrinsicperspective.com/p/the-gossip-trap
[café society]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Café_society
[Oura]: https://ouraring.com
[iconic duo]: https://open.spotify.com/track/4Flfb4fGscN9kXPOduQLrv
[Dark Sugars]: https://www.darksugars.co.uk
[Dishoom]: https://www.dishoom.com
[Guys and Dolls]: https://bridgetheatre.co.uk/whats-on/guys-and-dolls/
