+++
title = "Stanford Quarterly Reflection (Y1Q4)"
date = 2024-12-25
[extra]
type = "post"
+++

I continue to set new records in how long-overdue something can be.
Nevertheless, I refuse to let this summery meditation slip away.

<!-- more -->

I have written already at length about my [internship]. This can, for
the most part, take the place of the usual section on academics. Too
much time has passed for me to recall any other projects I pursued that
might be grouped in with my work to some alternative "productivity"
category. I met with [Adam Nash]? But that wasn't really work. It's hard
to say.

I lived in two apartments. The first was in the Marina: it had a little
backyard that was wonderful to sit in, and heated floors in the bathroom
that made walking around in the early mornings significantly more
pleasant. The second was in Cow Hollow: it was masterfully decorated,
had the most excellent kitchen I've ever lived with, and was situated
literally one block from Union Street. I think I've come to witness,
within my lifetime, the fall of Union Street and the rise of Chestnut,
and now the rebirth of Union as Chestnut grows stale. Which is to say
that though both were lovely, the latter apartment was a far more lively
neighborhood.

Living somewhere, for the first time, on my own and with a kitchen, I
was able to participate in perhaps my favorite tradition: Shabbat. I
hosted about seven in all, dashing out of work early on Fridays to the
grocery store and then to the stove to throw together the week's menu by
the time the guests would arrive. I had high-minded and silly
[inspirations] in mind while throwing them, and they largely lived up to
those expectations. I placed an inordinate amount of weight on and thus
care toward crafting cover images and descriptions for each [Partiful]
invitation. And I was honored that people came! To have had you eat of
my food and drink of my drink and be together in one place, laughing
late into the evening, was the greatest reward and made me quite happy.
I am also particularly fond of one story, in which Zach arrived an hour
late—he drove up from Stanford—and came through the door to hear,
"You're just in time! We're bringing out the food now. Come sit!" I was
not always the most punctual.

I also got away ever so briefly to New York, Oregon, and Mexico. I spent
the first running around seeing everyone who was available—which meant
quite a few people, given that Stanford basically splits in two between
San Francisco and New York for the summer. In Oregon I lived in lakes
and rivers, which was great because it might be impossible to have a bad
time in the water. In Mexico, I had costras de queso for the first time,
which was a life-changing experience I can highly recommend. The ant
larvae at La Gruta were a life-changing experience I am less
enthusiastic about.

Of course, people were the most influential in making my summer
wonderful. My whole family came to every Shabbat, baking the challot and
creating amusing Partiful personas. Daniel and Emily were on the couch
of my apartment waiting for me when I came back from my first day of
real work ever. Daniel also hosted me in New York—the city where we
first became friends—which was extraordinarily kind. Davita, Hasan, and
Zach were the most consistent Shabbat attendees and thus gave shape to
the most influential institution of those months. Odin crashed on my
couch for ten days during the one period in which I was working remote
and proceeded to induce The Most Fun and get me on creatine. Kelly and
Joven I will thank for foolishly jumping on a plane with me time and
time again, and Longhair for hosting us (and calmly weathering
anaphylaxis). Trun for our meal at Lavash. Vivek and Nate for tolerating
my god-awful tennis. Sophia for her rooftop DJ set, and Jordan and her
mother for a great Effy's brunch. Guy the locksmith for his
locksmithing, though he will never ever read this post.

Now I will immediately begin writing the next reflection, so that I can
hopefully have it done before I return from winter break. If I'm lucky.

Great revelry awaits!

[internship]: @/work/envelope/index.md
[Adam Nash]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adam_Nash_(executive)
[inspirations]: @/reading/great-gatsby.md
[Partiful]: https://partiful.com
